Upon inspection, there are common structural properties that lend themselves to an effective developer. These common properties are governed by the Kendall-Pelz rule, which states that the general structure for a developer can be represented by the structure

General Developer Structure: a – (A = C) n – b

where for A = C , a carbon, the developer is referred to as a Kendall developer; when A = N , a nitrogen, the developer is called a Pelz developer. The integer value of n can be from zero to any practical integer number limited largely by solubility. In most practical cases, the Kendall developer is used whereby n = 3, a benzene ring of six carbons. The lowercase a and b can be any combination of hydroxyl or amine moiety. Hydroquinone is a Kendall developer, for example, while 1-phenyl-3-pyrazolidone is a Pelz developer. Hydrazine would be an example of a hybrid n = 0 Kendall-Pelz developer, but as this compound is the active ingredient in the Space Shuttle solid rocket propellant, this molecule may not be the wisest choice for the photographic darkroom. Overall, the propensity of a developer to reduce silver ion to silver metal rest more in the side groups (a, b) rather than the fine-tuning that the heterocyclic moiety (A) places on the chemical activity. The Kendall-Pelz rule specifies that the side groups can be in either the para or ortho position on the benzene ring (the typical backbone), but not the meta position. Hydroquinone is an example of two hydroxyls substituted para to each other. Catechol illustrates an ortho example. Resorcinol, 1,3-dihydroxybenzene would seem to be a poor choice under the Kendall-Pelz rule, but in fact, this reducing agent has been used in photographic development. As a side note, by applying a generalized understanding to developer structure, any organic reducing agent that has the general developer structure may satisfy the requirement. Developers prepared from coffee and mint leaves have been successfully applied as a method of image development.

Following the addition of the developing agent to water, a preservative is added. When the preservative is sodium sulfite, which is the most common choice, two functions are performed. First, sodium sulfite preserves the solution by scavenging oxidizing agents, such as dissolved oxygen, which can degrade developer activity. Secondly, with its intrinsic metal chelating ability, sodium sulfite performs a grain solvent function in proportion to its concentration. Fine grain developers may contain as much as 15% weight per volume of sodium sulfite making it the major added component. To serve as a preservative, only a few percent would be required.

(According to Scott Williams Ph.D The chemistry of developers and the development process)
